docs(guidelines): add unit and integration testing guidelines (#119)
autowarefoundation/autoware-documentation: docs/contributing/testing-guidelines/unit-testing.md

# Unit testing

> Autoware uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests. The same framework is also used to analyze the test results.

Reviewer: @maxime-clem Would it be possible to add an explanation about unit testing and its benefits, similar to what you wrote for the integration testing guidelines page? It would keep the two sets of guidelines consistent, and could also be beneficial to new/junior developers.

Unit testing helps ensure that the code behaves as intended and prevents accidental change of behavior.

Autoware uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests.
The same framework is also used to analyze the test results.

`ament_cmake` provides several convenience functions to make it easy to register tests in a CMake-based package and to ensure that JUnit-compatible result files are generated.
It currently supports a few different testing frameworks like `pytest`, `gtest`, and `gmock`.

In order to prevent tests running in parallel from interfering with each other when publishing and subscribing to ROS topics,
it is recommended to use commands from [`ament_cmake_ros`](https://github.com/ros2/ament_cmake_ros/tree/master/ament_cmake_ros/cmake) to run tests in isolation.

See below for an example of using `ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest` with `colcon test`.
All other tests follow a similar pattern.

## Create a unit test with gtest

In `my_cool_pkg/test`, create the `gtest` code file `test_my_cool_pkg.cpp`:

```cpp
#include "gtest/gtest.h"
#include "my_cool_pkg/my_cool_pkg.hpp"
TEST(TestMyCoolPkg, TestHello) {
  EXPECT_EQ(my_cool_pkg::print_hello(), 0);
}
```

> For more examples of `gtest` features, see the [gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).

Reviewer: Changed this to an info box, since the sentence is not directly related to the instructions. 

```suggestion
!!! info

    For more examples of `gtest` features, see the [gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).
```

In `package.xml`, add the following line:

```xml
<test_depend>ament_cmake_ros</test_depend>
```

Next add an entry under `BUILD_TESTING` in the `CMakeLists.txt` to compile the test source files:

```cmake
if(BUILD_TESTING)

  ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest(test_my_cool_pkg test/test_my_cool_pkg.cpp)
  target_link_libraries(test_my_cool_pkg ${PROJECT_NAME})
...
endif()
```

This automatically links the test with the default main function provided by `gtest`.

> The code under test is usually in a different CMake target (`${PROJECT_NAME}` in the example) and its shared object for linking need to be added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code under test is usually in a different CMake target (`${PROJECT_NAME}` in the example) and its shared object for linking needs to be added.
```

To register a new `gtest` item, wrap the test code with the macro `TEST ()`.
`TEST ()` is a predefined macro that helps generate the final test code,
and also registers a `gtest` item to be available for execution.
The test case name should be in CamelCase, since gtest inserts an underscore between the fixture name and the class case name when creating the test executable.

`gtest/gtest.h` also contains predefined macros of `gtest` like `ASSERT_TRUE(condition)`,
`ASSERT_FALSE(condition)`, `ASSERT_EQ(val1,val2)`, `ASSERT_STREQ(str1,str2)`, `EXPECT_EQ()`, etc.
`ASSERT_*` will abort the test if the condition is not satisfied,

> while `EXPECT_*` will mark the test as failed but continue to next test condition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while `EXPECT_*` will mark the test as failed but continue on to the next test condition.
```

> More information about `gtest` can be found in the [gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).

Reviewer: Again, making this an info box. Although, does this need to be mentioned twice since it's mentioned above on line 31?

```suggestion
!!! info

    More information about `gtest` can be found in the [gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).
```

In the demo `CMakeLists.txt`, `ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest` is a predefined macro in `ament_cmake_ros` that helps simplify adding `gtest` code.
Details can be viewed in [ament_add_gtest.cmake](https://github.com/ros2/ament_cmake_ros/tree/master/ament_cmake_ros/cmake).

## Build test

<!-- cspell:ignore Testfile -->

By default, all necessary test files (`ELF`, `CTestTestfile.cmake`, etc.) are compiled by `colcon`:

```bash
cd ~/workspace/
colcon build --packages-select my_cool_pkg
```

Test files are generated under `~/workspace/build/my_cool_pkg`.

## Run test

To run all tests for a specific package, call:

```bash
colcon test --packages-select my_cool_pkg

Starting >>> my_cool_pkg
Finished <<< my_cool_pkg [7.80s]

Summary: 1 package finished [9.27s]
```

The test command output contains a brief report of all the test results.

To get job-wise information of all executed tests, call:

```bash

> colcon test-result --all

Reviewer 2: If there are some output logs, I remember it's recommended to add the `$` mark to distinguish the command and output.
```suggestion
$ colcon test-result --all
```

Reviewer 2: Also, you can consider replacing `bash` with `sh-session` to highlight correctly.

Reviewer 2: I'm sorry I couldn't find a good reference, but this is related code.
https://github.com/github/linguist/blob/2e1c938e8ca474e03161c2fa010650b2331223ca/lib/linguist/languages.yml#L6032

Reviewer 2: Thank you. Yeah, Markdown has some dialects. :cry:

build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/copyright.xunit.xml: 8 tests, 0 errors, 0 failures, 0 skipped
build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/cppcheck.xunit.xml: 6 tests, 0 errors, 0 failures, 0 skipped
build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/lint_cmake.xunit.xml: 1 test, 0 errors, 0 failures, 0 skipped
build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/my_cool_pkg_exe_integration_test.xunit.xml: 1 test, 0 errors, 0 failures, 0 skipped
build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/test_my_cool_pkg.gtest.xml: 1 test, 0 errors, 0 failures, 0 skipped
build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/xmllint.xunit.xml: 1 test, 0 errors, 0 failures, 0 skipped

Summary: 18 tests, 0 errors, 0 failures, 0 skipped
```

Look in the `~/workspace/log/test_<date>/<package_name>` directory for all the raw test commands, `std_out`, and `std_err`.
There is also the `~/workspace/log/latest_*/` directory containing symbolic links to the most recent package-level build and test output.

To print the tests' details while the tests are being run, use the `--event-handlers console_cohesion+` option to print the details directly to the console:

```bash

> colcon test --event-handlers console_cohesion+ --packages-select my_cool_pkg

Reviewer 2: Same here.

Author: Done b36db791b409e5461fd32b608f9ae033eaa3c7a6

> # Unit Testing

Reviewer 2: We use sentence case.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing
https://developers.google.com/style/capitalization

```suggestion
# Unit testing
```

> Autoware.Auto uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests. The same

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Autoware uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests. The same
```

> Autoware uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests. The same
> framework is also used to analyze the test results.

Reviewer 2: [nits] unnatural position of a new line character
Could you check other sentences as well? :bow: 

```suggestion
Autoware uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests. The same framework is also used to analyze the test results.
```

Or
```suggestion
Autoware uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests.
The same framework is also used to analyze the test results.
```

Reviewer 2: I believe we should add a new line only when there is a full stop or a comma.

Rationale:
- It's more readable and easier to review.
- We can notice long sentences.
  - It helps us comply with https://developers.google.com/style/translation#write-short,-clear,-and-precise-sentences

@LalithVipulananthan @maxime-clem What do you think?

Author: Done in 2a3302a4942ca0478cf9d86ba7f1555937c39afa
There is now a newline after full stops and commas, except in list items and if the comma is for a very small sentence.

Reviewer 2: @maxime-clem Thank you for updating!
And I'm sorry for my unclear explanation. :bow: 
You don't have to add a new line after every comma. I meant you can add a new line for long sentences.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31987104/172148820-3fe70496-21c2-4116-93c5-093585a9a298.png)

Reviewer 2: Ah, I'm sorry I probably misunderstood. You added a new line because the latter of the sentence is long. :bow:

CMake-based package and to ensure that JUnit-compatible result files are generated. It currently
supports a few different testing frameworks like `pytest`, `gtest`, and `gmock`.

In order to prevent tests running in parallel from interfering with each other when publishing and subscribing to ROS topics,
it is recommended to use commands from [`ament_cmake_ros`](https://github.com/ros2/ament_cmake_ros/tree/master/ament_cmake_ros/cmake) to run tests in isolation.

See below for an example of using `ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest` with `colcon test`.
All other tests follow a similar pattern.

## Create a unit test with gtest

In `my_cool_pkg/test`, create the `gtest` code file `test_my_cool_pkg.cpp`:

```cpp
#include "gtest/gtest.h"
#include "my_cool_pkg/my_cool_pkg.hpp"
TEST(TestMyCoolPkg, TestHello) {
  EXPECT_EQ(my_cool_pkg::print_hello(), 0);
}
```

For more examples of `gtest` features, see the
[gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).

In `package.xml`, add the following line:

```xml
<test_depend>ament_cmake_ros</test_depend>
```

Next add an entry under `BUILD_TESTING` in the `CMakeLists.txt` to compile the test
source files:

```cmake
if(BUILD_TESTING)

>   find_package(ament_lint_auto REQUIRED)
>   ament_lint_auto_find_test_dependencies()

Reviewer 2: You don't need to write this because it's executed in `autoware_cmake`.
https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_common/blob/b0ee3e99a07c6a722202de8e710c52bf13aec2d7/autoware_cmake/cmake/autoware_package.cmake#L58-L59

```suggestion
```

>   ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest(${TEST_MY_COOL_PKG} test/test_my_cool_pkg.cpp)
> 
>   target_link_libraries(${TEST_MY_COOL_PKG} ${PROJECT_NAME})

Reviewer 2: - I think this variable isn't defined.
- IMO, no new line looks better.

```suggestion
  ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest(test_my_cool_pkg test/test_my_cool_pkg.cpp)
  target_link_libraries(test_my_cool_pkg ${PROJECT_NAME})
```

To register a new `gtest` item, wrap the test code with the macro `TEST ()`. `TEST ()`
is a predefined macro that helps generate the final test code, and also registers
a `gtest` item to be available for execution.
The test case name should be in CamelCase, since gtest inserts an underscore between the fixture name and the class case name when creating the test executable.

`gtest/gtest.h` also contains predefined macros of `gtest` like `ASSERT_TRUE(condition)`,
`ASSERT_FALSE(condition)`, `ASSERT_EQ(val1,val2)`, `ASSERT_STREQ(str1,str2)`,
`EXPECT_EQ()`, etc. `ASSERT_*` will abort the test if the condition is not
satisfied, while `EXPECT_*` will mark the test as failed but continue to next test
condition. More information about `gtest` can be found in the
[gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).

In the demo `CMakeLists.txt`, `ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest` is a predefined macro in `ament_cmake_ros`
that helps simplify adding `gtest` code. Details can be viewed in
[ament_add_gtest.cmake](https://github.com/ros2/ament_cmake_ros/tree/master/ament_cmake_ros/cmake).

## Build test

> 

Reviewer 2: Like this.

```suggestion

<!-- cspell:ignore Testfile -->

```

Reviewer: Does this line need to be anywhere specific, or can I just add it to the end of the file?

Reviewer 2: It seems anywhere including the end of the file is acceptable.

> By default, all necessary test files (`ELF`, `CTesttestfile.cmake`, etc.) are compiled by `colcon`:

Reviewer 2: https://cmake.org/cmake/help/book/mastering-cmake/chapter/Testing%20With%20CMake%20and%20CTest.html

```suggestion
By default, all necessary test files (`ELF`, `CTestTestfile.cmake`, etc.) are compiled by `colcon`:
```

Reviewer: I had to look this up because I never put a full stop after `etc` but apparently it is required. However, since the examples given are in parentheses in the middle of a sentence, I think the full stop can be omitted. This is purely from an aesthetic point of view however and not required.

```suggestion
By default, all necessary test files (`ELF`, `CTestTestfile.cmake`, etc) are compiled by `colcon`:
```

Reviewer 2: Some examples from Google's style guide. It seems they add a full stop.

https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en
https://developers.google.com/style/api-reference-comments?hl=en
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31987104/170275422-5942f50d-16be-4dd5-bfc2-34420f204a27.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31987104/170275550-4c63688e-0fea-4bf3-875a-8ae45f6937e5.png)

1: [ RUN      ] test_my_cool_pkg.test_hello
1: Hello World
1: [       OK ] test_my_cool_pkg.test_hello (0 ms)
1: [----------] 1 test from test_my_cool_pkg (0 ms total)
1:
1: [----------] Global test environment tear-down
1: [==========] 1 test from 1 test case ran. (0 ms total)
1: [  PASSED  ] 1 test.
1: -- run_test.py: return code 0
1: -- run_test.py: inject classname prefix into gtest result file '~/workspace/build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/test_my_cool_pkg.gtest.xml'
1: -- run_test.py: verify result file '~/workspace/build/my_cool_pkg/test_results/my_cool_pkg/test_my_cool_pkg.gtest.xml'
1/5 Test #1: test_my_cool_pkg ...................   Passed    0.09 sec

...

100% tests passed, 0 tests failed out of 5

Label Time Summary:
copyright     =   0.49 sec*proc (1 test)
cppcheck      =   0.20 sec*proc (1 test)
gtest         =   0.05 sec*proc (1 test)
lint_cmake    =   0.18 sec*proc (1 test)
linter        =   1.34 sec*proc (4 tests)
xmllint       =   0.47 sec*proc (1 test)

Total Test time (real) =   7.91 sec
...
```

## Coverage

Loosely described, a coverage metric is a measure of how much of the program code
has been exercised (covered) during testing.

> In the autoware.universe repository, [Codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/autowarefoundation/autoware.universe/) is used to automatically calculate coverage of any open pull request.

Reviewer 2: It's not only for `autoware.universe`.

```suggestion
In the Autoware repositories, [Codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/autowarefoundation/) is used to automatically calculate coverage of any open pull request.
```

> More details about the coverage metrics can be found in the [Codecov documentation](https://docs.codecov.com/docs/about-code-coverage).

Reviewer 2: I think `code coverage` is more appropriate than just `coverage`.

```suggestion
More details about the code coverage metrics can be found in the [Codecov documentation](https://docs.codecov.com/docs/about-code-coverage).
```

# Unit Testing

Autoware.Auto uses the `ament_cmake` framework to build and run tests. The same
framework is also used to analyze the test results.

`ament_cmake` provides several convenience functions to make it easy to register tests in a
CMake-based package and to ensure that JUnit-compatible result files are generated. It currently
supports a few different testing frameworks like `pytest`, `gtest`, and `gmock`.

> In order to prevent tests running in parallel to interfere with each other when publishing and subscribing to ROS topics,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to prevent tests running in parallel from interfering with each other when publishing and subscribing to ROS topics,
```

```{cpp}
#include "gtest/gtest.h"
#include "my_cool_pkg/my_cool_pkg.hpp"
TEST(TestMyCoolPkg, TestHello) {
  EXPECT_EQ(my_cool_pkg::print_hello(), 0);
}
```

For more examples of `gtest` features, see the
[gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).

In `package.xml`, add the following line:

```{xml}
<test_depend>ament_cmake_ros</test_depend>
```

Next add an entry under `BUILD_TESTING` in the `CMakeLists.txt` to compile the test
source files:

```{cmake}
if(BUILD_TESTING)
  find_package(ament_lint_auto REQUIRED)
  ament_lint_auto_find_test_dependencies()

  ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest(${TEST_MY_COOL_PKG} test/test_my_cool_pkg.cpp)

  target_link_libraries(${TEST_MY_COOL_PKG} ${PROJECT_NAME})
...
endif()
```

This automatically links the test with the default main function provided by `gtest`. The code under test is usually in a different CMake target (`${PROJECT_NAME}` in the example) and its shared object for linking need to be added.

To register a new `gtest` item, wrap the test code with the macro `TEST ()`. `TEST ()`
is a predefined macro that helps generate the final test code, and also registers
a `gtest` item to be available for execution.

> Test case name should be in CamelCase.
> This is as gtest inserts an underscore between the fixture name and the class case name when creating the test executable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test case name should be in CamelCase, since gtest inserts an underscore between the fixture name and the class case name when creating the test executable.
```

`gtest/gtest.h` also contains predefined macros of `gtest` like `ASSERT_TRUE(condition)`,
`ASSERT_FALSE(condition)`, `ASSERT_EQ(val1,val2)`, `ASSERT_STREQ(str1,str2)`,
`EXPECT_EQ()`, etc. `ASSERT_*` will abort the test if the condition is not
satisfied, while `EXPECT_*` will mark the test as failed but continue to next test
condition. More information about `gtest` can be found in the
[gtest repo](https://github.com/google/googletest).

In the demo `CMakeLists.txt`, `ament_add_ros_isolated_gtest` is a predefined macro in `ament_cmake_ros`
that helps simplify adding `gtest` code. Details can be viewed in
[ament_add_gtest.cmake](https://github.com/ros2/ament_cmake_ros/tree/master/ament_cmake_ros/cmake).

## Build test

By default, all necessary test files (`ELF`, `CTesttestfile.cmake`, etc.) are compiled by `colcon`:

```{bash}
ade$ cd ~/workspace/
ade$ colcon build --packages-select my_cool_pkg
```

Test files are generated under `~/workspace/build/my_cool_pkg`.

## Run test

> To run test on a specific package, call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run a test for a specific package, call:
```
